HRC36 Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect Statement Item 2
Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General
12 September 2017
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect

====================

We thank the High Commissioner and his Office for their strong voice and
advocacy for the promotion and protection of human rights and we encourage
them to continue to mainstream RtoP in their work

====================

The protection of human rights and the prevention of human rights violations
contribute to the prevention of mass atrocity crimes. The United Nations
Human Rights Mechanisms are particularly well placed to contribute to that
objective as they are focused on improving the compliance of States with
international human rights obligations and commitments. By addressing
specific situations of concern, reviewing the obligations and commitments of
States, engaging with Member States on issues relating to their mandates, and
making recommendations for action, the Human Rights Mechanisms play an
important role in advancing preventive action, including as an early-warning
tool, in ways that can contribute to States’ efforts to advance their
responsibility to protect

====================

The Human Rights Council protects human rights, promotes prevention and
advances RtoP in at least three ways and in accordance with the Council’s
prevention mandate based on paragraph 5f of General Assembly Resolution
60/251; it provides technical assistance and capacity-building to help States
protect their populations, it encourages and enables States to address
widespread violations and abuses of human rights before they reach the level
of mass atrocities, and it authorises investigations when mass atrocities may
have been committed to report on them, prevent their recurrence and help
strengthen accountability. In this regard, we also welcome the Secretary-

General’s 9th annual report on Implementing the Responsibility to Protect:
Accountability for Prevention, which underscores that RtoP is a key element of
the Secretary-General’s prevention agenda

====================

The Universal Periodic Review could be a useful mechanism that provides an
opportunity for States to assess longer term mass atrocity risks and mobilise
support to mitigate them, including through the provision of technical
assistance and capacity building. As this year’s Secretary-General report on
RtoP notes, “Introducing an atrocity prevention lens to the UPR would help
ensure that underlying risks are identified early, facilitate remedial action by
national governments and promote international assistance”

====================

Mr. President,
The international community should assist States in protecting human rights
and promoting prevention, including exercising their responsibility to protect

====================

Several countries that have experienced mass atrocity crimes receive technical
assistance and capacity-building, including Cambodia, Yemen, the Central
African Republic and Sudan. To strengthen this aspect of the Council’s
preventive work, we should take into consideration the needs and concerns of
the State receiving assistance and be ready to offer long-term and sustainable
support

====================

Mr. President,
While the mechanisms of this Council serve important early warning functions,
when mass atrocities may occur or in their immediate aftermath, independent
investigations mandated by this Council shine a light on reports of crimes
allegedly perpetrated against populations by collecting evidence, identifying
potential perpetrators, and offering options to address the abuses. Among
others, mechanisms have been mandated for Syria, Burundi and Myanmar,
and we urge all relevant States to cooperate fully with the relevant
mechanisms